Update consensus.md to include online meetings (#1418)
WebAssembly/meetings: process/consensus.md

  over time, break down. Recording dissent is therefore a critical part of
  building consensus.

## Consensus at meetings

> For in-person, and online meetings, champions are expected to list points for which they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For in-person and online meetings, champions are expected to list points for which they
```

> For in-person, and online meetings, champions are expected to list points for which they

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For meetings, champions are expected to list points for which they
```

2. The chair asks all participants to express their opinion to the question,
   asking in turn whether they are `Strongly For`, `For`, `Neutral`, `Against`,
   or `Strongly Against`. Participants vote for a single option by raising their

>    hand, voting on a poll, or in chat for online meetings, or abstain entirely.

Reviewer: How about this wording: "Participants either abstain entirely or vote for a single option by raising their hand if meeting in person or by voting on a virtual poll or commenting in chat if meeting online."

Reviewer 2: or perhaps even "if attending in-person/online" since in practice we have both in a single meeting.

>    hand, voting on a poll, or in chat for online meetings, or abstain entirely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   hand, voting in an automated poll, in chat for online meetings, or abstain entirely.
```

>    hand, voting in an automated poll, in chat for online meetings, or abstain entirely.
>    Aggregate votes are recorded by the note-taker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   hand, voting in an automated poll, or typing in the chat of an online meeting.
   Aggregate votes are recorded by the note-taker. Any participant may choose to
   abstain instead of indicating a vote.
```

> 4. If deemed relevant, the chair can ask certain participants if their wish to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. If deemed relevant, the chair can ask certain participants if they wish to
```

> 4. If deemed relevant, the chair can ask certain participants if their wish to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If deemed relevant, the chair can ask certain participants if they wish to
```

Author: This has been fixed already, resolving. Thanks!

   explain their vote for the note-taker.
5. The chair determines whether consensus was reached.

> 6. A participant may decide to register a formal objection to the decision. An

Reviewer: Who is the director mentioned below? Is that the same as our W3C liaison?

Reviewer 2: No, it's the director of the whole W3C. However the process for WG formal objections has changed (I think https://www.w3.org/2023/Process-20231103/#addressing-fo is the current process). Maybe this can be fixed in a separate change.

Author: Yeah, I'd prefer to defer reflecting W3C changes to a separate change, this is only for reflecting our current process in the document.

official video calls. In the latter case, the consensus vote must be added to
the agenda at least 24 hours before the video call is scheduled to begin, except
in the case of general interest votes moving pre-proposals to phase 1, which can

> be added as the discussion proceeds. Consensus decisions are recorded in the

Reviewer 2: The paragraph above includes references to video call meetings, (as opposed to "in-person meetings" as the preceding "consensus at meetings" section used to talk about). But now video calls are added to the preceding section as official meetings.
So I think this paragraph should now say something like the following:

"It is critical that work progresses between full-CG meetings: agreed-upon
designs need to move forward, and new ideas need to reach some level of maturity
before being discussed in a full meeting. To that end, this group can reach consensus
online, either on GitHub repositories, or in smaller groups."

That leaves out the part about adding votes to the agenda 24 hours in advance. I guess that should move to the "consensus at meetings" section above.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should even rename this section, since now it covers Github and small groups, but not VC meetings?

the agenda at least 24 hours before the video call is scheduled to begin, except
in the case of general interest votes moving pre-proposals to phase 1, which can
be added as the discussion proceeds. Consensus decisions are recorded in meeting

> notes and published just like meeting notes are published.

Reviewer: Maybe just "Consensus decisions are recorded in the published meeting notes"

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> notes and published just like meeting notes are published.

Reviewer 2: looking at this section/paragraph more broadly, this seems to be including full-group VC meetings together with github (and now subgroups), so since we are now basically including VC above, this paragraph should be reworked a little more.

Author: Could you give me more specifically on what would be good to rework? In general having all polls in video meetings having a 24-hour notice, and being published in the notes seems like good practice. Or do you mean that you prefer that this is moved to the section above that talks about meetings only?

  participate in the WebAssembly Community Group or Working Group and are
  interested in a particular topic.
* *Small group* is a subset of Community Group and Working Group participants
  who decide to collaborate on a single targeted proposal, or a group of related
  proposals. If an official [subgroup](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/main/process/subgroups.md)

>   for the proposal exists, this term would refer to the subgroup.

Author: Subgroups do have a broader scope, but I don't think that's necessarily relevant here - for seeking consensus on a single issue, the subgroup, or the small group are equivalent. I've made a note below that a subgroup forum should be used if one exists that is relevant to the proposal.

   three contributors of different affiliations is acceptable as long as there
   is no objection. Consensus will be deemed to not have been reached if
   interested parties did not sign off. At any point in time a contributor can

>    request that final consensus be delayed to a subgroup, or a CG meeting. In this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   request that final consensus be delayed to a subgroup or CG meeting. In this
```

>    request that final consensus be delayed to a subgroup, or a CG meeting. In this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   request that final consensus be delayed to a subgroup or a CG meeting. In this
```

   case, the chair puts the item on the group's agenda of upcoming
   discussions.
3. Substantial technical changes or additions are usually carried in their own
   GitHub repository by a champion. It is critical that these proposals be able
   to evolve quickly without much process. Early on in such a proposal's
   lifetime no consensus is needed and a single champion can modify the proposal
   at will. As the proposal matures it is expected that the champion will seek

>    collaborators to form a subgroup. Gauging consensus in the small group is

Reviewer: There should not be an expectation that every proposal requires forming a formal subgroup.
```suggestion
   collaborators to form a small group. Gauging consensus in the small group is
```

>    left up to the champion, gauging consensus in a subgroup is left to the chair,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   left up to the champion, and gauging consensus in a subgroup is left to the chair
```

Reviewer: Since "small groups" include subgroups, it is ambiguous whether the chair or the champion declares consensus in cases where the small group is also a subgroup. It would be good to clarify that "if the small group is a subgroup, then the chair or co-chairs of that subgroup gauge consensus, and otherwise the champion guages consensus."

Author: I hit resolve by accident but, small group consensus especially online (ex: on PRs, issues), is usually up to the champion, and sometimes up to the subgroup chair. Whereas consensus at Subgroup meetings is usually upto the Subgroup chait. Will walk back the edit, and reword this better.

Author: I've reworked this paragraph a little bit to include subgroups, ptal.

>    or co-chairs of that subgroup. If a small group, or a subgroup is unable to reach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   or co-chairs of that subgroup. If a small group is unable to reach
```

>    consensus, consensus can be sought at an in-person, or online CG meeting. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   consensus, consensus can be sought at an in-person or online CG meeting. 
```

   When a proposal is near maturity the champion shall bring it to a meeting and seek wider
   consensus on open design points and contended issues. All decisions made by

>    the small group can be revisited until consensus is reached at an in-person,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the small group can be revisited until consensus is reached at an in-person
```

>    the small group can be revisited until consensus is reached at an in-person,
>    or online CG meeting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the small group can be revisited until consensus is reached at an in-person
   or online CG meeting.
```

   three contributors of different affiliations is acceptable as long as there
   is no objection. Consensus will be deemed to not have been reached if
   interested parties did not sign off. At any point in time a contributor can
   request that final consensus be delayed to a subgroup or CG meeting. In this
   case, the chair puts the item on the group's agenda of upcoming
   discussions.
3. Substantial technical changes or additions are usually carried in their own
   GitHub repository by a champion. It is critical that these proposals be able
   to evolve quickly without much process. Early on in such a proposal's
   lifetime no consensus is needed and a single champion can modify the proposal
   at will. As the proposal matures it is expected that the champion will seek
   collaborators to form a small group, or use the subgroup if one relevant to the
   proposal exists. Gauging online consensus in the small group is left up to the

>    champion or in some cases the subgroup chair. Gauging consensus at a subgroup meeting is

Reviewer: "in some cases" still seems underspecified. Should we just say that either the champion or relevant subgroup chair can declare consensus for online discussions?

Reviewer 5: I think the issue is that 'small groups' are not always subgroups, maybe it would be better to say that champion is responsible if it is a subgroup (subgroup maybe takes precedence over 'small group'). TBH, I don't know if we really use 'small group' concept in practice.

   left to the chair or co-chairs of that subgroup. If a small group is unable to reach
   consensus online or at a subgroup meeting, consensus can be sought at an in-person
   or online CG meeting. When a proposal is near maturity the champion shall bring it

>    to a meeting and seek wider consensus on open design points and contended issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   to a meeting and seek wider consensus on open design questions and contentious issues.
```
